Well, leading off of this last topic of the
generality of the oceanographer, I'm wondering,
since World War II, since the other sciences have
become somewhat integrated in the study of
oceanography and this somewhat of a generalized
field, as opposed to the land sciences where
people often are very specialized, would you say
that there that this is a new frontier where
something can be approached in a better way than we
have done with land in terms of pollution, for
instance, having the overall look at things
rather than the specialized look. Yes. Are we
getting a second chance with our approach to this
new frontier of the ocean as opposed to what we have
done on land? And how does that relate to it? but
generalized it. Yes. This is a topic that
interests me very much. You know, we really
haven't used the ocean until this generation for
much other than transportation and as a moat
protecting us in wartime from other countries,
from aggressors perhaps. We like to think of it
those as being aggressors. Today, of course, we
face the real problem of utilizing the ocean for
many, many purposes, not the least of which is
developing a sand and gravel, which comes to be in
short supply in many land areas. And of course,
petroleum, we well know.
The difficulty with The ocean is that almost
everyone that you can imagine identifies in some
way with the ocean. It's either that he hasn't seen
it and he wants to see it someday, or he's been on it
and has learned to love it, or he hates it because of
certain things. But at any rate, almost anyone you
talk to identifies with the ocean. Not so with the
land. We take this for granted. All right. Now,
when it comes to using the ocean effectively, we
have a very high degree of emotionality involved.
And it is here that I think our emotions really
begin to take over. In recent years, I've been
rather heavily involved in public hearings.
dealing with leasing of the continental shelf for
oil exploration and production. And I have been
involved in hearings for the disposal of certain
kinds of industrial waste beyond the continental
shelf. And as a consequence, I've come to feel very
strongly that there is a very definite pattern of
public reaction. to utilization of the ocean,
much of which is unreal. Now, for example, I won't
hesitate a moment to say that I feel that it is the
ocean that is far less valuable to us than the land.
And I feel that the air is much more important to us
than the ocean. For example, I'll make a a
heretical statement that I have thought about. It
isn't just off the cuff. I think we could live
without the ocean, but certainly we couldn't live
for a moment without the air envelope, and we
certainly shouldn't try to continue to destroy
land surfaces in ways that we're doing today. What
do we get? One percent of our food from the ocean
even yet. And with the population going up as it is,
I doubt that we'll improve much on that. If you've
got 15 million new people, not replacement
people, but new people a year in China alone, I
don't really believe that we're going to increase
the percentage take from the ocean. We will
increase the tonnage possible. All right, what
I'm saying is this. I think the elimination or
disposal of certain wastes from products that we
consider to be critical to man, and only if they are
considered to be very important, should be
disposed of in the ocean rather than the land. And
furthermore, I think that if you wanted to trace
the sanitary landfill approach back in history,
you could go back to the Etruscans. I think that you
clearly could look at the man who threw a chicken
bone over his back and kicked some dirt over it as a
sanitary landfill approach, or those who lived in
caves, the cave dwellers who covered with a fresh
layer of earth. So what I'm saying is we must
utilize the full extent of our scientific
knowledge of the ocean to make effective use of it
to continue to better man's life. And if that does
mean that we should effectively dispose of waste
in the ocean, I think we should. I think that some of
this has been very unreasoned. This isn't for
rampant pollution of the ocean, but it is, I think,
a very important thing that we utilize what we know
rather than the hearsay material that we get.
You've seen just recently in the Houston Post when
Shell Chemical applied for an ocean dumping
permit to continue dumping certain sludges from
one of their wastewater treatment areas. And a
captain of a fishing vessel, I suppose a charter
vessel, testified that the flower garden a west
flower garden reef, was now dead or dying. And as a
consequence of this, he held up a piece of coral,
which he said all the coral used to be sparkling
white. And now when he looked down in the waters,
all he saw was a brown blob. Well, not realizing, of
course, that white coral that he sees underwater
is dead and that the brown coral is living, if
indeed he saw it. And then he maintained the fish
population is going down, and yet he what?
Indicated that on one day he took 13,000 pounds out
of there in the good old days. Well, a reef with that
kind of food source can't sustain a population
even migratory. for that length of time, for any
length of time with a fishing rate of that tax. So
this is what I think is the epitome of the misguided
individual using his emotions, and they said he
was almost in tears, to attempt to control a system
he doesn't understand. Now, this is inevitable,
but the time must continue that the scientist gets
his information across as best he can.
I think this implies that more and more scientists
must get into the real practical world rather than
doing purely esoteric research. And I think this
is happening. I think in the last five years we've
seen much more of it, of this movement out. You
know, you get it even in high sources. A man like
Jacques Cousteau, for example, says the sea is
dying. Well, Cousteau has a large public
audience. He says this without any scientific
background whatsoever. Really.
He's got knowledge, but not a scientific
background to make an assertion such as this. For
example, Thor Heyerdahl said the same thing with
his raft. He'd look out every morning and see all
this crud. He was drifting with the current. He was
seeing the same crud day after day. So this is one of
those things that We have no doubt that certain
aspects of the sea are being handled very badly.
And again, we need to know what the sea can do for us.
Now that's a long answer to that. It sounds almost
like a harangue. But I've been needled a long time
on that subject, the last five years.
We are still not asking the ocean the right
questions. With all the money that's going into
biological research right now on the outer
continental shelf, we're still not getting at the
real mechanism.
I believe that a large part of the ocean is
sustained by the land, not by the primary
productivity of the ocean itself. So what
question should we be asking the ocean? Well, what
we need to do is, as individuals, take a moratorium
on running to sea to do research and attempt to
design
experiments at sea with equipment that is
properly designed to give us the kind of
quantitation we need to understand the system.
Right now, we can make conceptual models of what's
going on in the ocean. And yet, we can't quantify it
to produce a mathematical model that makes much
sense yet. And yet, this is going to be necessary in
order to manage the neuritic or inshore aspects of
the seed. Is this due to a sparsity of sampling or a
too narrowing of the type of sampling that's being
done? Yes, a little bit. The narrow approach, not
necessarily too little. There were good samples.
And the fact that we really don't have very good
equipment even yet. Ten years ago, you could
scarcely get a piece of equipment to work in deep
water that wasn't in operation in 1890. And I
think that sort of points up what I'm talking
about. And yet most of us are not engineers that can
do some of the things we should do. We need to have a
greater input from engineering in this field, I
think, to aid in that development. Well, what is,
then, the benthic skimmer? Skimmer? Skimmer, I'm
sorry. Oh, yeah. The benthic skimmer was, well,
several students and I designed an all-metal
device which could be pulled rather rapidly over
the bottom of the to
cut into the sediments at a predetermined depth
and store the organisms in side pockets in the cod
end out of the main stream of water so that we could
get them by virtue of the speed we were pulling,
which would overcome their speed, since we felt a
lot of organisms were escaping us because of that.
And yet, we could protect them from the main
slipstream and thus bring these more delicate
creatures up. It worked well enough, but
my time in deep water, I've got all the data I need to
finish this book. And if I've got any years left
after that, I've got one or two things that I hope to
do in the Gulf of Mexico before the 200-mile limit
goes into effect, since I think this is going to
create some real problems for oceanographic
research. I think it's inevitable that it will go
in, and I think it will mean that the paperwork
before going to sea will be perhaps a year or two
leap time before you can go out to sea and do what you
want, if indeed you can do it then.
Could you describe the Carnegie conference in
1951? Who was there, whose idea was it, and what was
your 51-52 really, and what you were trying to
accomplish or do there? Yes. I was asked in the
spring of 51 by
John Gardner, who was then at the Carnegie
Institute of New York,
to take the place of someone else who was going to
lead a symposium. I'd forgotten who that other
individual was, but at any rate, through illness,
I had to give up the plan. So what they wanted to do
was attempt to bridge the gap between the foremost
research activities going on in this country and
the high school. they felt that the universities
had a pretty good input into this and that that
information could get to the university student,
but it was not getting to the high school where most
scientists are really formed. Most of them begin
in the high school. And it was felt then that there
should be a way of doing this. They hadn't worked
out any protocol or any scenario at all. And so I,
because of, again, certain things that I had done
in pre-medical education, this sort of stuff, was
asked if I'd do this. I indicated, yes, I would give
it a try. So what I did was
sit down and decide who were the, foremost
scientists in the United States that could
contribute to certain aspects of knowledge and
began to invite them one by one to
produce a program. I rounded, sort of roughed out a
program that I had in mind. And then I had the
problem of deciding how to select the high school
teachers. And first and foremost, I wanted to try
to get those that were considered to be the best
teachers. I finally hit on the plan of asking
students in various colleges and universities to
nominate the people that they considered were the
best teachers. And I didn't limit it to the
students then in the university, but also to those
who had left the university and in retrospect
said, these are the guys the ladies or the men who
had the greatest influence on me. And I then
invited 100 of these people to submit their
credentials, and I selected 25 of what I consider
to be the outstanding teachers. And then went
about getting the scientists to come. You're
asking me to go back 25 years without thinking much
about it, but I do know that I had James Bonner, who
was one of the foremost plant physiologists. I
invited Jack Calvin, who was then working on
photosynthesis. Jack Calvin had had a heart
attack, so he sent Andrew Benson. These men worked
out along with a few others in this country,
photosynthesis. And it was in that period that,
for the first time, we understood what
photosynthesis was. And it was very cleverly
done. It was extremely clever experiments.
Andrew Benson is now at Scripps, the institution
of oceanography, by the way. He is not retired yet.
I got Knight. who was the leading virologist of the
time to come. I got George Beadle to talk about. And
in 51, we didn't know DNA yet, but he brought DNA
with him in 53 when he came back. But to speak on his
understanding of the gene, I got Hubble, who was
the foremost astronomer in the country to come and
speak on his yardstick for measuring the age of the
solar system, which, by the way, has been revised
upwards several times, and he had just revised it
upwards then. Harrison Brown, who was one of the
most stimulating men to speak on geophysics from
the Earth. Richard Feynman, who's still
considered one of the most inspiring physicists
of all time.
Well, I got Edward Goldberg and Roger Revelle. We
went and visited Scripps for a couple of days. We
had some British oceanographers. All these
teachers were treated as if they were red carpet
individuals, I tell you. And they were good. You
know, it disabused me then that all the brains are
going to be in the University of Science. And it was
not true. These men and women were very
stimulating to the speakers. As a matter of fact,
many of them became good friends. And well, then we
went to UCLA to the medical school that was
developing. And we were involved in the first
heart surgery.
and saw all the machines and what have you that were
devised to bypass the heart during these
operations. So it was a very stimulating
experience, and I can't remember all of them. But
once in a while, I looked back on the teachers, and
most of them now, of course, have moved up to
supervisors or in charge of education in the state
of California or what have you. Unusual people. I
called it Progress and Horizons of Science, as I
remember. Fantastic experience. I kept it, I
think, three years. Oh, no. Yes. Then National
Science Foundation asked me to devise it for them.
And I went on into 58, as I remember now, come to
think of it. I had a long history of that. I forgot
about NSF calling. It was because of that NSF asked
me to come back and I took a job with them. It was from
that that led to your associate directorship and
then your directorship at NSF. Yeah. Would you
want to describe your work at NSF? Yes. That was an
unsettling experience at first. You know, coming
from university and college work, uh where you
were always grappling with budgetary problems to
be introduced uh one day to your supervisors and
nsf and the next day told you had a budget of three or
four million dollars and spend it wisely was an
unsettling experience you know i ended up with uh
where i was put in charge orgy of special projects
anything that came along that was unusual was
given to me i unless i got oceanographic things i
was sent by alan waterman who was then the director
of the national science foundation uh for example
in 1961 to century 21 in seattle to to negotiate to
take over the science exhibit, the buildings.
They put in a fantastic set of buildings out there.
So this is the World's Fair. Yes. Century 21 in
Seattle. Right. And Commerce, by the way, that's
where I met Spielhaus. Spielhaus was the US
commissioner of that exhibit. And I dealt with
him, as a matter of fact, in taking that building
over, that set of buildings over, from Commerce.
They were declared surplus by Commerce. NSF took
them over temporarily, and I negotiated that
deal. And then we handed them over to a private
foundation, of which the head then, well, it was a
big committee, University of Washington and so on
involved, but the head man was a hotel man by the
name of Carlson, who is now, I think, president of
United Airlines. But
that was one of the kinds of things I did. At that
time, I was invited to President Kennedy, asked
Waterman to nominate somebody to represent him in
Argentina at an oceanographic conference where
it was going to be, what will the great Nord
Americano do for the South Americans in
developing oceanography? He was seriously
contemplating going, and then it was considered
that it would be too dangerous. There were lots of
communists there for him to go. But for a
nondescript like myself, it wasn't so bad. So they
sent me down there. I got involved in this kind of
special activity. And then I developed
new programs to aid universities. I gave, for
example, a major grant to Duke University to beef
up their engineering. They'd been very poor. To
aid Duke in developing a marine science program.
And I created one of the first programs in
hydrology in the United States and called
together all of the leading water people in the
world to a conference at NSF where we debated what
should be done and finally roughed out a program
and instituted it in several institutions, not
the least of which was the then-developed
University of Arizona, which has come forth with a
really outstanding hydrology program. Matter of
fact, I was offered a job at Cornell as a
hydrologist. The guy thought I knew so much from
this meeting, which I didn't. But that was the
history of my life, a very special topic, very
challenging, but a very exhausting work within a
set. And my wife, Linda, who of course has a degree
in oceanography,
wanted me to get out of that administration. And I
think on the side, she wanted to get her degree,
too. And so it worked out pretty well, my coming
here. Dale Leeper came back to one or two of my
conferences. Dale was then chairman of this
department. And finally, as a result of this, he
kept telephoning me about every other month
saying, when are you going to come down and visit us
and join our department? So after a year, I We liked
what we saw. And you didn't go then to SUNY at Stony?
Oh, in between I did go to SUNY. I only stayed, I
think, three months at SUNY. It wasn't long. Yes,
it wasn't long. I roughed out a program, picked a
site for their marine development.
I carried my resignation around in my coat pocket,
already stamped, ready to go. And finally one day
it got so bad, I just dropped it in the mailbox. And
after I dropped it, I phoned NSF and said, do you
have an opening left that I could fill? And they
said, yes, we surely do. You might have to take a
demotion, but they won't be long before we promote
you again. Got in the car with my family that night
in the middle of a snowstorm, drove to Washington,
and went to work the next day.